=head1 Introduction to Object Oriented Programming in Perl 6

=head2 Preamble

This introduction assumes some knowledge of Perl 6 and minimal to no
knowledge of object oriented programming.  Upon completion, you should
understand the basics of object oriented programming and be able to create
and manipulate objects in Perl 6.

=head2 What is object oriented programming?

Object oriented programming is a philosophy of wrapping data and the
operations that can be performed on that data into a single structure,
typically called an "object".  Some languages have built-in language
support for creating object definitions and manipulating objects, others do
not but still may be programmed in an object oriented fashion.  For
instance, the programming language C<C> does not have language support for
objects, but through creative use of C<typedef> and pointers, it can be
programmed as if it were object oriented. 

The main idea is that objects and their operations are tightly coupled.
They go together. Changing one may affect the other. So this
relationship should be made explicit in some way. In C<C> that
relationship would be obtained by writing code in a special fashion. In
languages that have built-in support for object oriented programming,
that relationship is made explicit by language constructs that declare
objects or groups of objects that follow the same patterns of behavior.

=head2 Creating objects (almost)

So how do we accomplish object oriented programming in Perl 6? 

To create a new object, we first must describe what these objects 
should look like:  what data should it encapsulate, what subroutines
should act upon that data, what interface should the object present to the
outside world, etc.  We do this in Perl 6 with the C<class> declarator.

=for example

    class Thingy { }

=end

This describes a new class of objects called C<Thingy>. Ordinarily,
there would be other declarations inside of the curly braces, but the
above is close to the simplest class definition you can createN<The
simplest class definition actually omits the name to create an anonymous
class, but more about that later.>. There are no subroutines to
manipulate data because there is no data to act upon. There is only a
name that Perl 6 now knows about, so that when it sees C<Thingy> in the
future, it will know to reference this class definition.

To give objects of a class some data to act upon, we have to declare some
data slots within the class definition.  These data slots are called
I<attributes>.  Perl 6 lets you create attributes within the class
definition with the C<has> declarator:

=for example

    class Thingy {
        has $!stuff;
    }

=end

The C<has> declarator sets aside a slot of the appropriate shape so that
when objects of this class are created, storage for the actual data can
be generated and used by the object. For the most part these data slots
are described just as you would describe any other variable within a
Perl program. They can be scalars, arrays, hashes, etc.N<The C<has>
declarator is used rather than C<my> because the lifetime of this
variables is different than ordinary variables. They only come into
existence when a new object of the class is created and disappear when
that object is destroyed.> An important difference though is that, in
addition to the main sigil that describes the interface for the
variable, it has a I<twigil> or a secondary sigil that describes the
variable access. In the above class definition, the C<Thingy> class has
a single scalar slot as indicated by the C<$> sigil, and the C<!> twigil
indicates that this scalar is "private" to this class. This variable can
only be accessed from within the class definition or from I<methods> that
belong directly to this class. It can't even be accessed by inherited
classes; but more on that later.

Subroutines that act upon the object are called I<methods> and are declared
within the class definition like so:

=for example

    class Thingy {
        method do_something { say "hi" }
    }

=end

For the most part methods look like ordinary subroutines; they can have
a signature specifying the name and type of parameters passed to the
method; they can contain arbitrary code; they can return values; et
cetera. However, methods will also have a special symbol available to
them called C<self> that is the object that the method is operating
upon. Also, methods can B<only> be called through an object in some way.
In the above example, we can't just call the method as C<do_something;>,
we need to call it on an object--C<$thingy-object.do_something>

Another I<twigil> that is commonly used is the C<.>:

=for example

    class Thingy {
        has $.stuff;
    }

=end

Not only will this set aside space for the scalar within the object, but it 
will also create an "accessor method" for the attribute.

=head2 Creating objects (really this time)

All objects come with a pre-defined set of behavior built-in.  One such
behavior is the ability to create new objects.  So, in order to create a
C<Thingy> object from the above class definition, you would do:

=for example

    my $object = Thingy.new;

=end

The object created in C<$object> will have all of the characteristics of a
C<Thingy>.  Whatever data slots were described in the class definition for
C<Thingy> objects will be present in C<$object>.  Whatever methods were
defined for C<Thingy> objects will be available to C<$object>


    class Point {
        has $!x;
        has $.y;
        has $.z is rw;
        my $foo;
    }

=head2 Roles

=head2 Delegation

=head2 Inheritance

Remember before when we said that all objects come with a pre-defined set
of behavior?  Ultimately this is because all objects implicitly inherit
from some built-in objects that have these behaviors.

=head2 Copyright and Author

Copyright 2011 
Jonathan Scott Duff 
duff@pobox.com

=end
