=head1 Introduction to Perl 6 Regex

=head2 Context

Over the years programming languages have incorporated features for
regular expressions. Some, such as Javascript, have added syntax
specifically to support regular expressions. Others, such as PHP, have
just reused their native string type and utilize special subroutines to
parse strings as regular expressions. But one thing almost all of them
have in common is that they have mimicked the extended regular
expression syntax of Perl.

Of course, Perl wasn't the first programming language to have support
for regular expressions. But it did make them popular. Perl has been so
successful as a text processing and glue language and regular
expressions so well interwoven into the language that anyone who uses
Perl almost I<has> to learn regular expressions. Also, by applying some
of Perl's philosophy to regular expressions, common usages became easy
and complex usages became possible. Here are just a few features that
resulted: character class shortcuts, annotated regular expressions,
ability to match unicode properties, zero-width assertions, independant
subexpressions, and code execution inside of a regular expression.

Unfortunately, as the regular expressioning public put more demand on
Perl's regular expression syntax, it accumulated some crufty items--
little inconsistencies that were to maintain backward compatibility or
were introduced because they were needed, but before they were fully
thought out. In designing Perl 6, Larry Wall not only looked at the
syntax and semantics of Perl proper, but he also took a hard look at the
sub-language that is regular expressions and refactored it into
something that makes better sense.

In this article I'm going to give an introduction to Perl 6 regex (we
call them "regex" to maintain the historical association with regular
expressions though they've strayed quite far from the mathematical
sense of regular languages). I'll point out differences from
Perl 5 syntax but no knowledge of Perl 5's regular expression syntax
should be necessary to understand this document.  If you're a Perl 5
geek, you may be bored for a while, but read anyway so that you can
pick up the syntactic and semantic differences.

=head2 Literals

Firstly, let's get some small syntactic things out of the way. In Perl
6, as in other implementations, regex are typically delimited by slashes
(aka, leaning toothpicks), so a typical regex to match the string "abc"
would look like this:

    /abc/

A regex is also sometimes called a "pattern" because we're looking for
a portion of a string that looks like the strings that the regex
describes. Regex are also sometimes called "rules" because they
describe the conditions under which the string may match. But what
string are we looking in? As in Perl 5, Perl 6 applies the regex to a
variable called C<$_> if we haven't explicitly specified a variable to
match against. For now I'm going to continue assuming that our string
is in C<$_> in my examples. Later I'll show you how to specify a
different string to match against.

So, the above regex tries to find the pattern "abc" in the string C<$_>.
If the pattern appears in the string, the regex returns a true value to
indicate that it matched successfully, otherwise it returns a false
value. It's important to note that the pattern may appear anywhere in
the string. So, for instance, if C<$_> contained "fooabcbar", the
above pattern will sucessfully match and the regex will return a true
value. Here are some more strings that would successfully match against
the regex:

    abcgoobltygook
    now I know my abcs
    abc
    babcock

=head2 Meta-syntax

Now, if all you can do is match literal strings, regexes wouldn't be so
useful would they? Some characters rather than taken literally are so-
called metacharacters that have special meaning in a regex. In Perl 6,
any non-alphanumeric character is considered a metacharacter by
default. That is, alphabetic and numeric characters match themselves and
any other character may not match itself because it may have special
meaning. (For the purposes of metasyntax, the underscore is considered
alphanumeric.)

Currently not all metacharacters actually I<have> a special meaning but
many do and in order to keep things simple, Perl 6 chooses to designate
all non-alphanumeric characters as metasyntactic. However, there's an
"escape mechanism" that lets you treat metacharacters as themselves
(literally), and alphanumeric characters as metasyntactic. By prefixing
an alphanumeric character with a backslash (B<\>) it becomes a
metacharacter and is special. By the same token, prefixing a non-
alphanumeric character with a backslash removes its metasyntactic nature
and it becomes literal.

So, for example, a common metasyntactic character found in regular
expressions is a period (C<.>, sometimes just called a "dot") and it
matches B<any> character. Thus,

    /f..d/

will match any four character sequence that starts with an "f" and ends
with a "d". All of the following strings match this pattern:

    my name is fred                     # matched "fred"
    I need food, now!                   # matched "food"
    those guys are turf idols           # matched "f id"
    shift down a gear                   # matched "ft d"
    
If you want to actually match a period you can escape it like so:

    /foo\./                             # matches "foo."

Similarly, the letter "t" in a regular expression matches itself (i.e.,
an occurence of the letter "t"). But, with a backslash immediately
preceding the "t", it takes on its metasyntactic meaning of a tab
character.  For example:

    /tall/          # matches the string "tall"
    /\tall/         # matches a tab character, followed by "all"

Another way to match character sequences that are to be taken
literally is to enclose them in quotes:

    /'foo.'/                            # matches "foo."
    /"foo."/                            # same

In these cases, the quotes are metasyntactic delimiters that mean
"match the characters in between literally".

=begin sidebar

In Perl 5 (and most other regular expression variants), a dot matches
any character except for the newline sequence. In Perl 6, this odd
restriction is lifted and the dot matches B<any> character, including
the newline sequence. Perl 6 has other mechanisms to accomplish Perl
5's behavior.  See L<"Character Classes"> below.

=end sidebar

The most important metasyntactic characters in regex are whitespace
(typically space characters, but sometimes tabs and other "invisible"
characters). Because regular expressions tend towards high character
density, they can often be difficult to read. In Perl 6 regex, you may
use whitespace to separate parts of your regex to make it easier to
read. The whitespace is ignored by the regex engine. To match literal
space characters, just as with other metasyntax, you may precede the
space with a backslash or enclose the space in quotes.

In future examples I will occasionally show a given regex in its spaced
form. The spaced form is preferable when writing regex as it makes them
easier to read later, and will be used from now on.

=head2 Quantifiers

Three other important metacharacters are what are called quantifiers.
These characters allow you to specify repetition; that a character or
group of characters may be matched multiple times.

    quantifier      matches
        *           the preceding thing zero or more times
        +           the preceding thing one or more times
        ?           the preceding thing zero or one time


Examples:

    / fo* /         # will match "f", "fo", "foo", "fooo", etc.
    / fo+ /         # will match "fo", "foo", "fooo", "foooo", etc.
    / fo? /         # will only match "f" or "fo" 

Note that in the above examples the quantifier is only applied to the
preceding character. If you need to match a group of characters
repeatedly, you have to use one of the several grouping mechanisms in
Perl 6 regex (see L<Grouping> below).

There is another character sequence sometimes called the universal
quantifier that allows you to prescribe a specific number of times a
particular pattern may match. To use the universal quantifier, you use
two C<*> characters followed by a number or a range like so:

    / fo ** 3 /     # matches only "fooo"
    / fo ** 3..5 /  # matches one of "fooo", "foooo", or "fooooo"

You may also specify a closure after the C<**>, but that is beyond the
scope of this introduction to explain.  See the references given at
the end of this article for more reading.

=begin sidebar

=head3 A note on greed

As in Perl 5, the quantifiers are greedy.  That is, they try to
consume as much of the target string as possible.  So the pattern

    / .* abc /

when applied to the string "abcdefghujklmnopqrstuvwyxz" will first try
to match the entire string (because C<.> matches any character and C<*>
tries to match as much as it can). When the regex engine gets to the end
of the string and can not match "abc" it will back up one character and
try to match "abc" again. This process will repeat until the regex
engine either matches or runs out of characters to process.

Also as in Perl 5, the greediness of quantifiers can be "turned off" by
adding a question mark (C<?>) immediately after the quantifier.
So for instance,

    / . *? abc /       # first tries to match nothing, then "abc"
    / . +? abc /       # first tries matching one character, then "abc"
    / . **?3..5 abc/   # first tries matching three characters, then "abc"

The default behavior (greediness) can be thought of as the regex engine
first matching the most characters that the quantifier will allow and
then backing up one character at a time if the rest of the pattern
doesn't match (to try again). With greediness turned off, the regex
engine matches as little as the quantifier allows and moves forward one
character at a time to match the rest of the pattern.

Note that a regex is processed from left to right and the greediness (or
non-greediness) behavior B<only> applies to the part of the regex
governed by a particular quantifier.  Making quantifiers match
minimally does not cause the pattern as a whole to match minimally.

=end sidebar

=head2 Character Classes

We've seen how to match a specific character at a given location by
putting that character in the regex and we've seen how to match any
character at a specific location by putting a dot in the regex, but
sometimes you want to match a specific I<set> of characters at a given
position. The mechism to do this in regex is called a "character class".
Character classes are designated by C<< <[]> >> with the specific
characters listed inside the brackets. For instance,

    / foo <[dlt]> /      # matches "food", "fool" or "foot"

The sequence C<< <[dlt]> >> represents any one of the characters "d", "l",
or "t". You can also specify a set of contiguous characters to match
using a range like so:

    / <[ a..d ]> /      # matches one of "a", "b", "c", or "d"

You can also mix ranges and specific characters:

    /<[ a..d xyz ]>/    # matches one of "a","b","c","d","x","y", or "z"
    /<[ xyz a..d ]>/    # same
    /<[ x..z a..d ]>/   # same

Some character classes are so useful that they have their own
designated short-cuts.  All of the character class short-cuts make use
of alphabetic characters that have been given a metasyntactic meaning
by prefixing the character with a back slash.  Here's a table of the
short-cuts:

    short-cut       matches
    \w              word characters (alphabetics, numerics, and underscore)
    \W              non-word characters
    \d              digits
    \D              non-digits
    \s              whitespace characters
    \S              non-whitespace characters
    \t              tab character
    \T              anything but a tab character
    \n              newline sequence
    \N              anything I<but> a newline sequence
    \r              carriage return character
    \R              anything but carriage return character
    \f              form feed character
    \F              anything but form feed character
    \h              horizontal whitespace
    \H              anything but horizontal whitespace
    \v              vertical whitespace
    \V              anything but vertical whitespace

You may notice some regularity in this table. For every character class
short-cut of the form C<< \<lower case letter> >> the anti-class is
always C<< \<corresponding upper case letter> >>. (The old non-newline
meaning of C<.> maps neatly to the new C<\N> sequence.)

Character classes bear a remarkable resemblance to sets.  In fact, you can "add"
and "subtract" character classes much like you would sets:

    /<[a..z] - [aeiou]>/    # Only match a consonant
    /<[asdfg] + [hjkl;]> +/ # Only match a sequence of characters that can
                            # be made from home row keys.


=head2 Grouping

There are several ways to group a portion of a regex. We saw one such
way earlier in our discussion of literals: surround the characters with
quotes. Quoting does two things, it forces all of the characters between
the quotes to be treated literally and it groups the string of
characters together into a quantifiable unit.

    / 'foo.' * /    # will match "foo.", "foo.foo.", "foo.foo.foo.", etc.

Another way to create a quantifiable unit is to use square brackets
(C<[]>).  Square brackets delimit a portion of the regex that may be
treated as a whole.  The text in between the brackets is just another
regex.

    / f[ oo ]* /       # will match "f", "foo", "foooo", "foooooo", etc.
    / a[ bc* d ]? /    # will match "a", "abd", "abcd", "abccd", "abcccd", etc.

Yet another way to group a portion of a regex to be treated as a unit is
to use round brackets (C<()>). These are identical to square brackets
as far as grouping goes, but additionally, the portion of the string
that is matched by the regex inside the round brackets is also saved
somewhere and may be accessed later in a variety of ways. Round brackets
are said to be "capturing brackets" because of this property. The
following table shows some examples of what would be captured if the
given regex matched certain portions of a string:

    regex       matched         captured

    /f(oo)*/    "f"             ""              # the empty string
                "foo"           "oo"
                "foooo"         "oooo"

    /a(bc*d)?/  "a"             ""              # the empty string
                "abd"           "bd"
                "abcd"          "bcd"
                "abccd"         "bccd"

Both round and square brackets delimit a portion of the regex. This
portion of the regex is called a "subpattern". The portion of the string
that matches a subpattern can be referenced and accessed individually.
We'll talk more about capturing and where the captured portion of the
string is stored later.

=head2 Alternation and Conjunction

There are a couple of other useful concepts in regex called
"alternation" and "conjunction".  Alternation is the idea that at a
given location in a string, there are alternatives to what may be
matched.  Conjunction is the idea that at a given location in a
string, there are multiple portions of a regex that must match exactly
the same section of the string.

Alternation is designated in regex by either a single vertical bar
(C<|>) or a double vertical bar (C<||>).  While each allows you to
specify alternatives, how they process those alternatives is different.

A single vertical bar does "longest token" matching on the
alternations with no inherent order as to which alternative is tried
first.  So, for instance, if we were matching the string
"football", the following regex

    / f | fo | foo /

would match "foo" since that's the longest matching portion of the
regex in the alternation.  But the regular expression engine may have
tried them all before it discovered "foo", or perhaps "foo" was the
first and only alternative tried. It is completely up to the
regex engine implementation as to how the alternatives are tried.

Had the regex been

    / f | fo | fo.*l | foo /

then the third item in the alternation would be matched since
C<fo.*l> will match the entire string. Again, which order the
alternatives are tried is unspecified.

A double vertical bar (C<||>) will match each alternative in a left-to-
right manner. That is, the regex

    /  f || fo || foo /

will first try to match "f", and then (if it failed to match "f") try
to match "fo", and finally it will try to match "foo". So, were the
above regex applied to the string "football" as before, the first
alternative ("f") would match. This behavior is exactly the same as
traditional implementations of alternation in other backtracking
regular expression engines.

Which alternative matches and the order in which the alternatives are
tried becomes particularly important when each alternative has side
effects (such as setting a variable or calling a subroutine). We'll
talk more about that later.

Similar to alternations, conjunctions in regex are designated by either
a single ampersand (C<&>) or a double ampersand (C<&&>). In both forms,
all of the conjuncted terms must match the exact same portion of the
string they are being matched against. But, as with alternation, the single-
ampersand version matches the subpatterns in some unspecified order while the
double ampersand version of conjunctions will try each conjuncted
portion of the regex in a left-to-right manner.

For an example, if the following regex were applied to the string
"blah",

    / <[a..z]>+ & [ ... ] /     # matches "bla"

it would match the string "bla" because the subpattern on the right of the
ampersand matches exactly 3 characters and the subpattern on the left
matches any sequence of lower case letters. By comparison, had the regex
been (still applied to the string "blah"):

    / <[a..z]>+ && [ ... ] /

It B<still> would match "bla" but how it arrives at that match is
slightly different.  First, the left hand side of the C<&&> would match
as much as it possibly can (since C<*> is greedy), then the right hand
side would match its 3 characters.  Since the two sides then do not
match the exact same portion of the string, the regex engine is said
to "backtrack" and try the left hand side with one fewer character
before trying to match the right hand side again.  This continues
until both sides match the exact same portion of the string or until
it can be determined that no such match is possible.

=head2 Backtracking

Backtracking has the potential to happen whenever there is a decision
point in a regex. An alternation creates a decision point with several
alternatives; a quantifier creates a decision point where a given
portion of a regex may match one more or one fewer times. Backtracking
is caused by the regex engine's attempt to satisfy an overall match. For
instance, when matching the following regex against the string "footbag"

    / [ foot || base || hand ] ball /

the regex engine will match "foot" and then attempt to match "ball" when
it realizes that "ball" will not match, it backtracks to the point where
it matched "foot" and tries to match the next alternative at that point
(in this case, "base"). When that fails to match, the regex engine will
try to match the next alternative, and so forth until either one of the
alternatives matches or they are all exhausted.

Now, as a human walking through the same sequence of steps that the
regex goes through, I can tell right away that since C<foot> was
matched, that neither C<base> nor C<hand> will match. But the regex
engine may not know this. (For this simple example, the regex engine can
probably figure out that the alternatives are mutually exclusive. If
that bothers you, imagine that they are instead complicated expressions
rather than simple strings) As the match for "ball" repeatedly fails,
the regex engine repeatedly backtracks and tries again.

However, Perl 6 provides a way to tell the regex engine when to give
up. A colon in the regex causes Perl to not retry the preceding
"atom".  In regex parlance, an atom is anything that is matched as a
unit; a group is an atom, a single character may be an atom, etc.
So, in the above example, if I wanted to tell the regex engine to not
try the other alternatives once one of them matched (because I, as the
person writing the regex, know that they are all mutually exclusive),
I simply follow the group with a colon like so:

    / [ foot || base || hand ] : ball /

As soon as one of the alternatives match, the regex engine will move
past the colon and try to match C<ball>. When it fails to match C<ball>,
ordinarily it would backtrack to try other possibilities. But now the
colon acts as a stopping point that says, "don't bother backtracking
because nothing else will match" and so the regex engine will fail that
portion of the regex immediately rather than trying all of the other
alternatives. It's important to note that the colon does not necessarily
cause the entire regex to fail once it is backtracked over, but only the
atom to which it is applied. If not matching that atom means that the
entire regex won't match, then, of course, the entire regex will fail.

Perl 6 has other forms of backtracking control. A double colon will
cause its enclosing group to fail if backtracked over. A triple colon
will cause the entire regex to fail.   For more information on these
see L<S05:Backtracking control>.

=head2 Zero-Width Assertions

As the regular expression engine processes a string to see if it matches
a given pattern, it keeps a marker to denote how much of the string it
has processed so far. (When this marker moves backwards, the regex
engine is backtracking) As the marker moves along the string, it is said
to "consume" the string. Sometimes you want to match without consuming
any of the input string or match between characters (say the transition
from an alphabetic character to a numeric character or only at the
beginning of the string). This idea of matching without consuming is
called a zero-width assertion.

Perl 6 provides some metacharacters that denote handy zero-width
assertions.  

    ^       only matches at the beginning of the string
    $       only matches at the end of the string
    ^^      matches at the beginning of any line within the string
    $$      matches at the end of any line within the string
    <<      A word boundary, but only matches the transition from
            non-word character to word character (i.e., the left-hand
            side of a word)
    >>      A word boundary, but only matches the transition from
            word character to non-word character (i.e., the right-hand
            side of a word)

Here are some example patterns and the portion(s) of the string that
would match if each pattern were applied repeatedly to the entire string
"the quick\nbrown fox\njumped over\nthe lazy\ndog" ("\n" denotes a new
line sequence within the string (i.e. "\n" terminates each line))

    Pattern             Matches

    / ^the \s+ \w+ /    "the quick"
    / \w+ $ /           "dog"
    / ^^ \w+ /          "the", "brown", "jumped", "the", and "dog"
    / \w+ $$ /          "quick", "fox", "over", "lazy", and "dog"
    / << o\w+ /         "over"
    / o \w+ >> /        "own", "over", "og"

In order for the patterns that would match multiple portions of the string 
to actually match those substrings, there needs to be some way to tell the regex
engine to continue matching from where the last match left off. See L<modifiers>
below.

=head2 Interacting with Perl 6

=head3 match objects and capturing

When a regex successfully matches a portion of a string it returns a
Match object. In a boolean context the Match object evaluates to true.
When using capturing brackets (parentheses), the part of the string that
is captured is placed in the Match object and can be accessed in a
number of ways.

The Match object itself is called C<$/>.  The substring captured by the
first set of parentheses is placed in C<$/[0]>, the substring captured
by the second set of parentheses is placed in C<$/[1]> and so forth.
There is a short-hand way to access these elements of the Match object
that will be familiar (yet slightly different) to people who have used
regular expression engines similar to Perl 5.  The short-hand for
$/[0],$/[1],$/[2], etc. are the special variables $0, $1, $2, etc.
The big difference from other regular expression engines is that the
numbering starts with 0 rather than 1.  Starting from 0 was chosen to
mimic the array indices of the match object.

=head3 matching Perl variables

Unlike Perl 5, a variable placed inside a regex does not automatically
interpolate the value of the variable. What happens with the variable
depends on context (this B<is> perl after all :-). An "unadorned"
variable will interpolate as a literal string to match if it's a scalar,
or as an alternation of literal strings to match if it's an array or
hash (not strictly true, but true enough for now). So, given the
following declarations:

    my $foo = "ab*c";
    my @bar = < one two three >;

The regex:

    / $foo @bar /

matches exactly as if you had written

    / 'ab*c' [ one | two | three ] /

Sometimes a variable inside of a regex is actually used to affect a
named capture of a specific portion of the string instead of (or even
in addition to) storing the captured portion in $0, $1, $2, etc.
For instance:

    / $<foo>:=[ <[A-Z]+[0-9]>**4 ] / 

if the group matches, the result is placed in C<< $/<$foo> >>.  As with
numeric captures, there is a short-hand syntax for accessing a named
portion of a Match object:  C<< $<foo> >>

=head3 matching other variables.

Until now we've talked primarily about the pattern matching syntax
itself, but how do we apply these rules to a string other than C<$_>?
We use the smart match operator C<~~>.  This operator is called "smart
match" because it does quite a bit more than just apply regular
expressions to strings, but for now we're just going to focus on that
one aspect of the smart match operator.  So to match a regular
expression against the string contained in a variable called C<$foo>,
we'd do this:

        $foo ~~ / <regex here> /;

There's a more general syntax that allows the author to choose
different delimiters if your regular expression happens to match the
C</> character and you don't feel like writing C<\/> so much:

        $foo ~~ m/ <regex here> /;
        $foo ~~ m! <regex here> !;      # different delimiter

=head3 modifiers

The more general syntax also gives us a convienent place to put
modifiers that will affect the regular expression as a whole.  For
instance, there is an C<ignorecase> modifier that causes the RE engine
to be agnostic towards case distinctions in alphabetic characters.
There's also a short-hand for this modifier for those times when
C<ignorecase> is too much to type out.

        $foo ~~ m :ignorecase/ foo /;    # will match "foo", "FOO", "fOo", etc.
        $foo ~~ m :i/ foo /;             # same

Perl 6 predefines several of these modifiers (for a complete list,
see L<S05>):

    modifier        short-hand      meaning
    :ignorecase     :i              Ignore case distinctions
    :basechar       :b              Ignore accents and other marks
    :sigspace       :s              whitespace in pattern matches
                                    whitespace in string
    :global         :g              matches as many times as possible
    :continue       :c              Continue matching from where
                                    previous match left off
    :pos            :p              Just like :c but pattern is
                                    anchored where the previous match left off
    :ratchet                        Don't do any backtracking
    :bytes                          dot matches  bytes
    :codes                          dot matches codepoints
    :graphs                         dot matches language-independent graphemes
    :chars                          dot matches "characters" at current 
                                    Unicode level
    :Perl5          :P5             use perl 5 regex syntax

There are two other modifiers for matching a pattern some number of
times or only matching, say, the third time we see a pattern in a
string. These modifiers are a little strange in that their short-hand
forms consist of a number followed by some text:

    modifier        short-hand              meaning
    :x()            :1x,:4x,:12x            match some number of times
    :nth()          :1st,:2nd,:3rd,:4th     match only the Nth occurance

Here are some examples to illustrate these modifiers:

    $_ = "foo bar baz blat";
    m :3x/ a /              # matches the "a" characters in each word
    m :nth(3)/ \w+ /        # matches "baz"

Some of these modifiers may also be placed inside the regular expression and
their effect is scoped until the end of the innermost enclosing
bracketing construct or the end of the pattern.

    / a [ :i foo ] z/  # matches "afooz", "aFOOz", "aFooz", "afOoz", etc.

The :sigspace modifier is quite useful. If you're unsure of the amount
of whitespace between tokens or can't guarantee a certain number of
spaces, you may be inclined to use C<\s*> or C<\s+> often in your regex.
However, it can get tedious typing C<\s+> so often and it tends to
visually detract from the parts you're really interested in matching.
Thus Perl 6 regex provides the :sigspace modifier so that whitespace
in your pattern matches whitespace in your string.  This is I<so>
useful that Perl provides a nice short-cut for it.

    /\s*One\s+small\s+step\s*/      # yuck
    m:sigspace/One small step/      # much better
    mm/One small step/              # even better!

=head2 Named Assertions

Earlier we talked about "zero-width assertions" that allow us to match
"in between" characters. But we've also talked about other kinds of
assertions, only we didn't call them that. Whenever you write a regex to
match I<anything>, you're asserting something about what a successful
match should look like. So, for instance, in the following regex,

    / \w+ '(' [ \w+ ',' ]* [ \w+ ]? ')' /

we are asserting that, for a string to match, it must contain a sequence
of word characters followed by a C<(> followed by zero or more word
character sequences optionally terminated with a comma and finally, a
C<)>. Each of the "tokens" is an assertion about what must match for the
entire regex to match. So, C<\w> is an assertion that a word character
must match, C<'('> is an assertion that an open parenthesis must match,
and so forth. (There are 6 assertions in the above regex)

However, the regex would make more sense if we could give the
individual pieces meaningful names.  For instance, if we could
write the above regex like so:

    / <function_name> '(' [ <parameter> ',' ]* <parameter>? ')' /

you might have a better idea what those C<\w+> sequences were for.
Lucky for us, Perl 6 provides just such a mechanism.

The syntax for declaring a named regex is:

    regex identifier { \w+ }

Once declared, we can use this in another regex like so:

    / <identifier> /

and it is identical to

    / \w+ /

with an important and useful exception: the portion of the string that
matches can also be accessed as C< $/<identifier> >.

Perl 6 predeclares several useful named regex (See L<S05> for a complete list):

    <alpha>     a single alphabetic character
    <digit>     a single numeric character
    <ident>     an "identifier"
    <sp>        a single space character
    <ws>        an arbitrary amount of whitespace
    <dot>       a period (same as '.')
    <lt>        a less-than character (same as '<')
    <gt>        a greater-than character (same as '>')
    <null>      matches nothing (useful in alternations that may be empty)

You may have noticed that a C<regex> declaration looks very similar to a
subroutine declaration. Indeed, regex are very much like subroutines.
They may even have parameters. There are two named regex that are used
to obtain zero-width look-ahead and look-behind. The parameter passed to
these named regex may be another regex:

    <before ...>        Zero-width look ahead for ...
    <after ...>         Zero-width look behind for ...

An example:

    / foo <before \d+> /        # only matches on "foo" followed
                                # immediately by some digits

Since these assertions are zero-width, the "pointer" that keeps track
of how much of the string has been consumed will point just after the
"foo" portion of the string on successful match so that the digits
can be processed by other means if necessary.

By declaring named regex like this you can build up a whole library of
regex that match some special purpose language. In fact, Perl 6 lets
you group your regex under a common name by declaring that all of your
regex belong to the same "grammar".

    grammar Calc;

    regex expr {
        <term> '*' <expr> |
        <term> '/' <expr> |
        <term>
    }

    regex term {
        <factor> '+' <term> |
        <factor> '-' <term> |
        <factor>
    }

    regex factor { <digit>+ |  '(' <expr> ')' }

The grammar declaration must appear at the beginning of the file and is
in effect until the end of file. To explicitly declare the scope of the
grammar, enclose the regex in curly braces like so:

    grammar Calc {
        regex expr { ... }
        regex term { ... }
        regex factor { ... }
    }

To match strings that belong to this grammar, the named regex must be
fully qualified:

    "3+5*2" ~~ / <Calc.expr> /;

Perl 6 also has some shortcuts for specifying common and useful defaults
to the regex engine. If, instead of using the C<regex> keyword, you use
C<token>, Perl 6 will automatically turn on the C<:ratchet> modifier for
the duration of the regex. The idea being that once you've matched a
"token" you're not likely to want to backtrack into it.

Also, if you use C<rule> instead of C<regex>, Perl 6 will turn on both
of the C<:ratchet> and C<:sigspace> modifiers.

Here's the C<Calc> grammar above, rewritten to use these syntactic
shortcuts:

    grammar Calc;

    rule expr {
        <term> '*' <expr> |
        <term> '/' <expr> |
        <term>
    }

    rule term {
        <factor> '+' <term> |
        <factor> '-' <term> |
        <factor>
    }

    token factor { <digit>+ |  '(' <expr> ')' }

There's not much difference is there? But it makes a big difference in
what gets parsed. The original grammar did not have any provisions for
matching whitespace, so any whitespace in the string would cause the
pattern to fail. A string like "3 + 5 * 7" would not be matched by the
original grammar. Now, because whitespace in the pattern is parsed as
whitespace in the string, that string will parse successfully.

=head2 Strings and Beyond

Throughout this article I've been talking about regex as they apply to very
ASCII-like strings, however Perl 6 regex are not restricted by ASCII.  Perl 6
regex can be applied to any string of Unicode characters and, in fact, are
written in Unicode by default.

Moreover, Perl 6 regex can be applied to things that are not strings but can be
made to look like strings.  For instance, they can be applied to a filehandle
(which can represent itself as a stream of bytes/characters/whatever).  Even
stranger, is that regex can be applied to an array of objects.  See
L<S05:Matching against non-strings>.

=head2 Conclusion

Well, that's about it for this introduction to Perl 6 regex. I've run
out of steam. There are tons of features that I've left out since this
is just an introduction. A few that come to mind are:

=over 4

=item * match object polymorphism

Captured portions of the regex can be accessed as strings, but they
can also be accessed in other ways: as a match object, as an array (if
the subpattern is quantified), as a hash, etc.

=item * Perl code in regex

Curly braces in a regex allow for execution of arbitrary perl code as
the regex is matched.

=item * quantifier enhancement

The universal quantifier can be used to match more than just some number
of times. If the thing on the RHS of the C<**> is a regex, then that is
taken as the pattern to match as the separator between items that match
the LHS. (e.g., <ident>**',' will match a series of identifiers
separated by comma characters)

=back 

Be sure to read the references given below for a more detailed
explanation of the features mentioned in this article.

=head2 References

If you want to read more about Perl 6 regex, see the official Perl 6
documentation at L<http://perlcabal.org/syn/S05.html>. There are also
some historical documents at
L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/doc/design/apo/A05.html> and
L<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/doc/design/exe/E05.html> that may give you a
feel for things. If you're really interested in learning more but feel
you need to interact with people try the mailing list at 
perl6-language@perl.org or log on to a freenode IRC server and drop 
by #perl6.

=head2 About the Author

Jonathan Scott Duff is an Information Technology Research Manager at the
Conrad Blucher Institute for Surveying and Science on the campus of
Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi.  He has a beautiful wife and 4 lovely
children. When not working or spending time with his family, Scott tries
to keep up with Parrot and Perl 6 development. Sometimes he can be found
on IRC as PerlJam in one of the perl-related channels. But if you really
want to get in touch with him, the best way is via email: duff@pobox.com


Copyright 2007-2009 Jonathan Scott Duff
